Epigenetic mechanisms, involving alterations to the genome that do not affect the underlying DNA sequence, are increasingly recognized as some of the principal mediators of gene expression (Duncan et al., 2014). The most researched and best understood epigenetic process is DNA methylation, which most commonly involves the addition of a methyl group to a cytosine in a CpG dinucleotide pair. The role of DNA methylation is best understood in mammals, where methylation in promoter regions has a repressive effect on gene expression (Jones and Takai, 2001). In plants and invertebrates, methylation of gene bodies prevails, and is thought to be the ancestral pattern (Zemach et al., 2010). Gene body methylation appears to have a range of functions, including regulating alternative splicing, repressing intragenic promoter activity, and reducing the efficiency of transcriptional elongation (Duncan et al., 2014). Methylation of gene bodies may vary according to gene function, and studies on invertebrates indicate that genes with housekeeping functions tend to be more heavily methylated than those with inducible functions (Roberts and Gavery, 2011, Sarda et al., 2012, Dixon et al., 2014, Gavery and Roberts, 2014). This has led to speculation that gene body methylation may promote predictable expression of essential genes for basic biological processes, while an absence of methylation could allow for stochastic transcriptional opportunities in genes involved in phenotypic plasticity (Roberts and Gavery 2012, Dixon et al., 2014, Gavery and Roberts, 2014).

Reef-building corals, the organisms that form the trophic and structural foundation of coral reef ecosystems, are among the numerous organisms about which we know very little regarding their epigenetics. However, it is known that corals display a significant degree of phenotypic plasticity (Todd 2008, Granados-Cifuentes et al., 2013). As long-lived, sessile organisms, corals are thought to be particularly reliant on phenotypic plasticity to cope with environmental heterogeneity, because they must be able to withstand whatever nature imposes on them over long periods of time (Bruno and Edmunds, 1997). Recent studies on gene expression variation support the view that phenotypic plasticity in corals is robust and may provide resilience in the face of ocean warming (Barshis et al., 2013, Granados-Cifuentes et al., 2013, Palumbi et al., 2014). However, the underlying basis of gene expression variation, and indeed phenotypic plasticity, remain largely unknown.

Evaluation of epigenetic processes therefore represents a logical next step in understanding coral gene expression and phenotypic variation. To date, only one study has investigated epigenetic processes in corals (Dixon et al., 2014). Germline DNA methylation patterns in the transcriptome of *Acropora millepora* corroborated findings reported in studies of other invertebrate species (Dixon et al., 2014). Most interestingly, genes that were differentially expressed in response to a common garden transplantation experiment were among the genes exhibiting lower levels of germline methylation (Dixon et al., 2014). This finding provides more direct support for earlier studies on invertebrates showing that hypomethylated genes tend to be those with inducible functions based on gene ontology (GO) information (Gavery and Roberts, 2010, Sarda et al., 2012).

In this study, the link between inducible gene expression and low germline methylation is probed even further using data on coral gene expression in response to elevated temperature, ocean acidification, and other stressors (e.g. Meyer et al., 2011, Moya et al., 2012). At least six reef coral species have both publicly available transcriptome data and one or more dataset on differentially expressed genes in response to environmental stressors (Table 1). 

###Table 1. Data sources used in the study
Organism | Transcriptome reference | Environmental factor | Response dataset reference
--------- | ---------- | ----------- | ----------
*Acropora hyacinthus* | Barshis et al. (2013) | Thermal stress | Barshis et al. (2013)
*Acropora millepora* | Moya et al. (2012) | Macroalgal contact | Shearer et al. (2014)
 |  | Ocean acidification | Moya et al. (2012)
 |  | Thermal stress | Meyer et al. (2011)
*Acropora palmata* | Polato et al. (2011) | Thermal stress | Polato et al. (2011)
*Montastraea faveolata* | Desalvo et al. (2008) | Thermal stress | Desalvo et al. (2008)
*Pocillopora damicornis* | Vidal-Dupiol et al. (2013) | Ocean acidification | Vidal-Dupiol et al. (2013)
 |  | Pathogen exposure | Vidal-Dupiol et al. (2014)
 |  | Thermal stress | Vidal-Dupiol et al. (2014)
*Stylophora pistillata* | Karako-Lampert et al. (2014) | Thermal stress | Maor-Landaw et al. (2014)


Germline methylation patterns in these  data can be readily inferred due to the tendency of methylated cytosines to mutate into thymines over evolutionary time, which leads to reduced levels of CpG dinucleotides in heavily methylated regions. The ratio of observed to expected CpGs, known as CpG O/E or CpG ratio, can therefore be calculated to infer levels of germline methylation. Methylation levels estimated by this technique are highly correlated with direct measures of methylation enrichment (Sarda et al. 2012). In addition to calculating CpG ratio, transcriptome data were also annoted with GOSlim biological processes terms in order to relate patterns of germline methylation to information on gene function.
